Judgmentally involutive identity types (#1015)
UniMath/agda-unimath: src/foundation/judgmentally-compositional-identity-types.lagda.md

        ( distributive-inv-concat p (f x refl)))
```

### The judgmentally compositional identity types are equivalent to the standard identity types

We define the equivalence `compositional-eq-eq : x ＝ y → x ＝ᶜ y` using the
judgmentally right unital concatenation operation on identifications. While this
makes the proof it is a section non-judgmental, it instead gives us the
judgmental computation rules

```text
  compositional-eq-eq refl ＝ refl-compositional-Id
```

and

```text
  eq-compositional-eq refl-compositional-Id ＝ refl.
```

The proof that it is a retraction requires the
[function extensionality axiom](foundation.function-extensionality.md). However,
function extensionality will become indispensable regardless when we move to
proving miscellaneous algebraic laws of the type family.

```agda
module _
  {l : Level} {A : UU l} {x y : A}
  where

  compositional-eq-eq : x ＝ y → x ＝ᶜ y
  compositional-eq-eq p z q = q ∙ᵣ p

  eq-compositional-eq : x ＝ᶜ y → x ＝ y
  eq-compositional-eq f = f x refl

  is-section-eq-compositional-eq :
    is-section compositional-eq-eq eq-compositional-eq
  is-section-eq-compositional-eq f =
    eq-multivariable-htpy 2

>       ( λ z p → inv (commutative-concatr-refl-Id-compositional-Id f p))

Author: If I could somehow get this proof to reduce to `refl` when `f = refl-compositional-Id`, then we would also get a definitional computation rule for the induction principle of the computational identity type and the yoneda identity type.

> # The judgmentally compositional identity types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Judgmentally compositional identity types
```

```agda
module foundation.judgmentally-compositional-identity-types where
```

<details><summary>Imports</summary>

```agda
open import foundation.action-on-identifications-functions
open import foundation.dependent-pair-types
open import foundation.judgmentally-right-unital-concatenation-identifications
open import foundation.multivariable-homotopies
open import foundation.universal-property-identity-systems
open import foundation.universe-levels

open import foundation-core.contractible-types
open import foundation-core.equivalences
open import foundation-core.function-types
open import foundation-core.functoriality-dependent-pair-types
open import foundation-core.identity-types
open import foundation-core.retractions
open import foundation-core.sections
open import foundation-core.torsorial-type-families
```

</details>

## Idea

> The [standard definition of identity types](foundation-core.identity-types.md)
> suffer the limitation that many of the basic operations only satisfy algebraic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The standard definition of [identity types](foundation-core.identity-types.md)
has the limitation that many of the basic operations only satisfy algebraic
```

laws _weakly_. In this file, we consider the

> {{#concept "judgmentally compositional identity types" Agda=yoneda-Id}}

Reviewer: An explanation of why this identity type is called `yoneda-Id` would be very fitting for the `## Idea` section.

    {x y : A} (f : x ＝ʸ y) → f y (inv (f x refl)) ＝ refl
  compute-inv-Id-yoneda-Id {x} f =
    ( commutative-postconcat-refl-Id-yoneda-Id f (inv (f x refl))) ∙
    ( left-inv (f x refl))

  inv-distributive-inv-Id-yoneda-Id :
    {x y z : A} (f : x ＝ʸ y) (g : x ＝ʸ z) →
    inv (g y (inv (f x refl))) ＝ f z (inv (g x refl))
  inv-distributive-inv-Id-yoneda-Id {x} {y} f g =
    ( ap inv (commutative-postconcat-refl-Id-yoneda-Id g (inv (f x refl)))) ∙
    ( distributive-inv-concat (inv (f x refl)) (g x refl)) ∙
    ( ap (inv (g x refl) ∙_) (inv-inv (f x refl))) ∙
    ( inv (commutative-postconcat-refl-Id-yoneda-Id f (inv (g x refl))))

  distributive-inv-Id-yoneda-Id :
    {x y z : A} (f : x ＝ʸ y) (g : x ＝ʸ z) →
    f z (inv (g x refl)) ＝ inv (g y (inv (f x refl)))
  distributive-inv-Id-yoneda-Id f g =
    inv (inv-distributive-inv-Id-yoneda-Id f g)
```

### The judgmentally compositional identity types are equivalent to the standard identity types

We define the equivalence `yoneda-eq-eq : x ＝ y → x ＝ʸ y` using the
judgmentally right unital concatenation operation on identifications. While this
makes the proof it is a section non-judgmental, it instead gives us the

> judgmental computation rules

Reviewer: This sentence is unclear. For example, I do not know what it means for a proof to be non-judgmental.

Author: Good catch

```text
  yoneda-eq-eq refl ＝ refl-yoneda-Id
```

and

```text
  eq-yoneda-eq refl-yoneda-Id ＝ refl.
```

The proof that it is a retraction requires the
[function extensionality axiom](foundation.function-extensionality.md). However,
function extensionality will become indispensable regardless when we move to

> proving miscellaneous algebraic laws of the type family.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
proving miscellaneous algebraic laws of the Yoneda identity type.
```

?

Author: I haven't yet explained "yoneda". I'll do that

Reviewer: It was mainly about what "the type family" refers to. I would also be happy with

```suggestion
proving miscellaneous algebraic laws of the judgmentally compositional identity type.
```

(unless "the type family" referred to something else of course)

  eq-yoneda-eq : x ＝ʸ y → x ＝ y
  eq-yoneda-eq f = f x refl

  is-section-eq-yoneda-eq :
    is-section yoneda-eq-eq eq-yoneda-eq
  is-section-eq-yoneda-eq f =
    eq-multivariable-htpy 2
      ( λ _ p → inv (commutative-postconcatr-refl-Id-yoneda-Id f p))

  is-retraction-eq-yoneda-eq :
    is-retraction yoneda-eq-eq eq-yoneda-eq
  is-retraction-eq-yoneda-eq p = left-unit-concatr

  is-equiv-yoneda-eq-eq : is-equiv yoneda-eq-eq
  pr1 (pr1 is-equiv-yoneda-eq-eq) = eq-yoneda-eq
  pr2 (pr1 is-equiv-yoneda-eq-eq) = is-section-eq-yoneda-eq
  pr1 (pr2 is-equiv-yoneda-eq-eq) = eq-yoneda-eq
  pr2 (pr2 is-equiv-yoneda-eq-eq) = is-retraction-eq-yoneda-eq

  is-equiv-eq-yoneda-eq : is-equiv eq-yoneda-eq
  pr1 (pr1 is-equiv-eq-yoneda-eq) = yoneda-eq-eq
  pr2 (pr1 is-equiv-eq-yoneda-eq) = is-retraction-eq-yoneda-eq
  pr1 (pr2 is-equiv-eq-yoneda-eq) = yoneda-eq-eq
  pr2 (pr2 is-equiv-eq-yoneda-eq) = is-section-eq-yoneda-eq

  equiv-yoneda-eq-eq : (x ＝ y) ≃ (x ＝ʸ y)
  pr1 equiv-yoneda-eq-eq = yoneda-eq-eq
  pr2 equiv-yoneda-eq-eq = is-equiv-yoneda-eq-eq

  equiv-eq-yoneda-eq : (x ＝ʸ y) ≃ (x ＝ y)
  pr1 equiv-eq-yoneda-eq = eq-yoneda-eq
  pr2 equiv-eq-yoneda-eq = is-equiv-eq-yoneda-eq
```

> The reflexivity witnesses are mapped to reflexivity witnesses judgmentally.

Reviewer: Would "reflexivity element" be an acceptable name for you?

Author: Yep
